# Chapter 1

## Judgments

1. *$value* is a *$type*. (Typechecking a value)
2. *$value* is the same *$type* as *$value*. (Comparing value equality -- implies equality can't be asserted without type information)
3. *$type* is a type. (Asserting something is a type)
4. *$type* and *$type* are the same type. (Comparing equality of types)

## Expressions

Everything is an **expression**.

## Normal forms

The **normal form** of an expression is the most direct way of writing thr expression in terms of a type. Every expression has a normal form. **Evaluation** is the process of reducing an expression closer to its normal form.

Two expressions are equivalent if they have the same normal forms.

Because equality depends on type, normal form also depends on type.

## Constructors

**Type constructors** take 0 or more type variables and returns a new type.

**Data constructors** take 0 or more values and return a new value of its type.

```haskell
data Btree a = Leaf a | Branch a (Btree a) (Btree a)
```

`Btree` is a type constructor. It takes the type variable `a` and returns two new types, `Leaf` and `Branch`.

`Leaf` and `Branch` are data constructors. They take some value `a` of type `A` and return new values `Leaf a` or `Branch a (Btree A) (Btree A)`.

## Values

An expression leading with a data constructor is a **value**. On the other hand, `two \`add\` one` is not a value.

An expression is **normal** if it is a data constructor followed by a normal value.

Example:

```haskell
data Nat = Zero | AddOne Nat

-- is normal
Zero

-- Zero is normal and AddOne is a data constructor, so one is normal
one = AddOne Zero

-- one is normal so two is also normal
two = AddOne One

-- this is not normal because the body is not normal
three = two `add` one
```

## Types

## `Atom`

`data Atom = -- 'every possible string`

`'foo`, `'bar`, `'baz` are all data constructors for `Atom` that take zero arguments.

Two `Atom`s are equal if `A` is equal.

### `Nat`

`data Nat = Zero | AddOne Nat`

`Zero == Zero`

If `n == k` then `AddOne n == AddOne k`

### `Pair`

`data Pair a d = cons a d`

```haskell
data Pair a d = Cons a d

car :: Pair a d -> a
car (Cons a _) = a

cdr :: Pair a d -> d
cdr (Cons _ d) = d
```

`Pair` is a **type**. Its **data constructor** is `cons`. (Simple, untyped array with max length of 2.) `car` (contents of address register) gets the first element while `cdr` (contents of the decrement register) gets the second element. When `cons`ing a value and a list, `car` is `head` and `cdr` is `tail`.

`Pair a1 a2 == Pair b1 b2` if both are of type `Pair A B` and `car a1 == car b1 && cdr a2 == cdr b2`.

